Hey there and welcome to the Python.
Now that the Python is
installed and you have written
at least one hello world.
Now the next topic that we need
to work on is virtual environment.
Why does it even exist and why do we
even have the virtual environment?
So let me tell you that.
What's the story behind
Virtual environment?
It's like safeguarding your
application from other versions
and don't clutter your operating
system and also so that your
program actually moves safely in
other environment as well on
Linux, on Mac or other people's
computer.
So the most important part of it is,
let's just say that I
want you to say that this is your
whole computer, all right?
And you have installed Python
on it, all right?
Once you've installed the Python, you
will also bring third party code.
Remember I told you that you
can actually borrow this piece
of code anywhere you like?
Yeah, this is exactly like that.
And let's just say you're
working and you have installed
Python on your computer.
Now you go ahead and say, hey, I want
to borrow this piece of code.
So this piece of code is installed on
your system, probably in an orange
color, and you work on that.
Now you will have Python programs
in your computer just like this.
This is a small piece
of another standalone Python program
that you're working on.
This is also another one.
Now all of these Python piece of
code, if they are dependent on this,
they have to actually go ahead
and communicate with this one.
So all of this is
dependent on this one.
And let's just say this piece
of code gets an update and now
it's not of orange color, it's
actually red in the color.
But your application, at least some
of the application, was dependent
on it, on the orange version of it.
Now what will happen?
This is not going to work,
so this will turn purple.
Not a good idea, that you
install the whole thing,
whatever the dependency you need,
into a single place.
And now if there is a dependency
on previous version,
it just gets really bad.
What could be the alternate version
of this entire thing, the
alternate version is actually
super easy, that instead of just
installing it like this, let's go
ahead and turn this back into the
orange color.
And instead of everybody marking
this as a dependency like this,
we simply go ahead and say, hey
everybody, you get your own Python.
I will have Python on my whole
operating system, that's okay.
But you also get your own version
of the Python, the smaller version.
And whenever you have a dependency
of it, you don't install
the dependency on my Whole computer.
You actually go ahead
and install the dependency
on your system as well.
Now this is actually behind this.
So there we go.
And similar to this, we will have.
Oops, we will have
this dependency here.
So we'll just go ahead and take
this one here as well,
and this one here as well.
Now if this operating system
want to stay up here, so let's
just say let's turn this
into green, everybody is happy.
But this application now says, hey,
I want the upgraded version
of it and I'll be fine with this.
This can turn into red.
This application is okay,
but this one is still
using the orange version.
Maybe this one also wants to get
even higher version than the red.
Probably a yellow version of it.
It's not visible.
We'll choose another color,
probably sharper.
Yellow.
Yeah, this one use a yellow
version of the Python or any
sub module of the Python.
And this is the whole concept
of a virtual environment.
You virtually create an environment
and this environment is just
isolated for this application only.
It's not dependent on your
whole operating system.
You can install whatever you like
on your operating system, but you
have a virtualized environment.
That means for every application
that I create, I create a,
standalone Python environment.
And then whatever I install gets
installed in this ecosystem, not
on my whole ecosystem.
And that's your virtual environment.
I hope you love this
diagrammatic explanation.
These are super awesome.
I love them actually.
So let me walk you through that,
how you can actually create them.
There are many ways.
The one that I'm showing you is
the most common one, the first one.
I'll show you the most latest
one as well, which is my favorite
and you will also love that.
And that piece of tech as well.
The most important and the easy way
of having this is first, let's
just say we want to have a folder.
We're going to call this
one as 01, not minus 1 01.
And we're going to call
this one as, virtual.
Feel free to name it
whatever you like.
The easy way is right click on this
and open the integrator terminal.
Now you will have a terminal or
also known as command line opened
up in this particular folder.
So I do have Python
installed on my system.
I can just verify it.
I'm on the Mac, so I have
to say Python 3.
If you're on Windows,
just say Python.
So I'll just say Python 3.
Just give it option dash
And then we will use
a program which automatically
comes up, which is venv.
This is known as Virtual Environment.
Now, in what folder or in what
directory you want to install
this virtual environment.
Remember I told you we will
install this in yellow one.
We will install this in, in this one.
Whatever you want to call
this one, you can just go
ahead and call this one.
Usually you'll see that either people
call it also Venv, the same name,
or some people call it as venv.
Just to make sure that it's hidden
from your regular files.
That's the only reason for creating,
you can call it Superman.
No problem there.
Once I hit Enter, this actually goes
ahead and create this whole thing.
Now notice here it
created a new folder.
I'll create one more folder here
so that it looks nice
and I'll call this one as temp, or I
can call this as src for Source.
And now you can see that we have this
whole virtual environment folder.
This actually creates a separate
version of the Python in itself.
Now this has just created
it, it's not activated.
Currently you're using the Python
version, which is installed
in my whole computer, not the small
box here to activate it.
There are actually two commands, one
for Mac, one for Windows.
You can use any one of them.
First I'll walk through
with the Windows.
So name your folder,
call it as vnv, Env.
Whatever you have named your
folder, I have called it as Venv.
So I'll name this one.
Then on the Windows and again it's
always same, it's a forward slash.
Then you have to go
ahead and say scripts.
You will have a folder.
So go ahead and open this
up and see the folder and inside
the scripts you have slash,
again forward slash and activate.
This is how you activate your
virtual environment
in Windows if you're on the Mac.
What I have to do is say Source.
That is how you load this.
Then I can see I do
have a bin folder.
So I'll go inside the bin.
Not like that.
So source.
And then I'll go ahead and say
first let's go ahead and dot, venv.
Then I'll go inside the Bin
folder and in the Bin I can see
that I do have an activate.
So just open this one.
This activate.
This is the file that I want to run.
So I'll just go ahead
and say activate.
Once I hit Enter, you will see
something like this parenthesis vnv.
That means now you are not
in my computer's Python, but you are
into the virtual environment.
This is where you can install
and bring the third party.
It will not affect anything
that you are Bringing in one.
So let me also walk you through
now that you understand this part
that why this was being done.
To actually go ahead and install
a third party, I have
to write it better third party
software or third party modules.
So let's just say I want to bring
in a module of web development
Flask, which is very, very popular.
All I have to do.
There are a couple of ways
how you can do this.
I can just go ahead now say pip
install and simply say
hey, I want to install flask.
It will go ahead and install flask.
And if I want to bring in, let's
just say request a module which
helps me to make web requests,
I can just go ahead and do this.
But there is another way.
Yeah, there is another way
which is more popular.
In this folder, whichever folder
you are, you actually tend to
create a new file known as
requirements Txt Again it's a
simple text file and there is no
strong reason to call it as
requirements.
It can be hitesh txt as well.
But I'm telling you the standard way
and you simply go ahead
and write what do you want?
For example, I want requests.
So it will install request.
I can have a flask and it will
have the flask and then I can
simply go ahead and say one more
command, pip install install.
But use the installation from
a file so dash R for the file
and just go ahead and say I want
to have this from requirements.
Other thing which most people does
is don't install
requests just like this.
They want a specific version of it.
Like this version will be
not red of course or a yellow
like I want to install 231310.
I will walk you through how they get
the version specifically later on.
But this is how they
mention it this one.
Let's just say I want
a version of 3.0.0.
There is a website from where
you get all of this information.
So don't use sweat on it.
Don't you worry on that.
Now once I do this and if I go
ahead and say install this one
and I hit enter on this, this is
going to go ahead and work on it.
You can ignore totally this.
You may have installed
Python package in a global
environment, all of this.
So no, don't worry,
totally ignore it.
We know that 100% we are into
this one virtual environment.
It's asking us that hey, you
can upgrade your pip as
well and all of this detail.
But hey, rest assured that you
have actually installed everything
in your virtual environment.
That's the reason.
So again It's a simple process
and it makes your environment
totally separate.
So we have the yellow one and in
this and the beauty about it, the
best part is now I can give this
software to anyone and I don't
have to include this virtual
environment.
They can install these dependency
which are required for my
software to run using this
requirement files super easy.
How cool is that?
Actually that is why I love
this and I will walk you through
with this entire process.
So now that you know that how you can
actually have a virtual environment,
one and only important
thing that I would recommend you.
Everyone is always work in venv.
That means virtual environment.
It is kind of a good practice and
a must have practice in the
entire Python ecosystem so that
your every software that you're
writing, every package that
you're writing is independent of
your software, independent of
your computer.
And anybody can actually install
your software and run through
it, whether Mac, Windows or
another system, always and always
work in virtual environment.
So we will bring this habit
of having virtual environment.
And the best part is that I don't
have to give this file to you.
Vnb, you can create a fresh virtual
environment, install the things
from the requirement and that's how
the softwares are being shipped.
We usually put it into git
ignore, but you can just go ahead
and simply delete it as well.
But first I'll actually go
ahead and say deactivate so
that it actually deactivates
this virtual environment.
And then we'll just go ahead and say
hey, I will just delete this.
This is how softwares
are being shipped.
You actually install a fresh
copy through the Python
requirement and we ship only
requirements as well as we
ship just the Python code.
So this is one way of having
the virtual environment.
This is a traditional way.
Yes, you need to know this is
traditional way.
Traditional.
This is a traditional way.
There is also a new way
of installing the Python.
So the traditional way says that
you always go ahead and use venv.
But there is a new way as well.
And new way actually uses more tool
of the Python which is uv.
This is actually much, much powerful.
And a lot of people are loving this.
This is too bright.
A lot of people are loving
the UV way, including me.
And in the next video I will walk you
through that how you can actually
have UV to work all of this.
You don't have to do all of this
installation, everything, it
works much smoother than this.
I would prefer to teach you the UV
way because hey, it's modern world.
This was used like
seven, eight years ago.
Still, it works fine, and you will
see a lot of source code with this,
but I want to walk you through
with a newer way as well.
So in the next video I will
walk you through with this.
Probably at the very
end of the section.
I still want to discuss a little
bit more on how to organize your
files and folders and structure
in the Python in a production way.
So let's talk about that first,
and then I will walk you through
with the UE as well.
Don't worry, I'll teach
you this part as well.
As a bonus, let's go ahead and catch
up in the next video.